# Graphic Misconduct

The Digital Humanities is a relatively new field of academic discourse. This field looks at the influence society had on the creation of technology as well as how technology influences society. The danger in this is endless recursion – from cause to effect as a cause and so on. But recursion is just the technical side of this problem which, like the Digital Humanities themselves, has another side rooted in interpretation and analysis. This problem could be referred to as excessive self-analysis, introspection or the more colloquial “navel gazing”; a loop of analyzing itself and then analyzing the analysis and so on. Johanna Drucker’s Humanities Approaches to Graphical Display, while having some useful observations, is mired in re-stating flaws it admits are well-known and proposing reform which ends up being more vague and confusing than what it replaces.

Ironically, from the beginning, Drucker makes assumptions about the assumptions involved in the creation and presentation of graphs – data in a representative graphical form. The claim “realist approaches to visualization assume transparency and equivalence” (Drucker) is just one of many statements that seem to believe that graphs are presented without context or a mention of factors which may be relevant to a study. Every complaint of Drucker’s about graphs needing to represent context and influences is generally covered in academic work by the accompanying prose. Her own examples of how graphs could, or according to her should, work require a paragraph each to explain what they represent and how. Not to mention her discussion of graphs uses incredibly simple styles to say that what they display is limited in scope; she doesn’t touch on what can be done with current designs in her deconstruction and criticism.

Drucker also openly states that in academia “none are naïve when it comes to the rhetorical character of statistics.” Everyone who she is addressing knows that statistics and graphs can be biased on their own. This assumption isn’t just found here, it’s noted in other papers which delve into statistics and graphing. An example from one paper reads, “Quantitative data can tell us when Britain produced one new novel per month or week or day, or hour for that matter, but where the significant turning points lie along the continuum—and why—is something that must be decided on a different basis,” (Moretti). The implication is that the data, once displayed as a curve or line or bar, is already biased. This is one of Drucker’s actual points, the idea that in a graph “data is capta”, but even there I’d say she gets it a bit wrong. Making a graph is using data to create capta.

The rest of the article presents some interesting points such as the graphical treatment of time when trying to emphasize human experience. When she focuses more on the application of some of her ideas (rather than running in circles with her criticism) it really shows how a graph can be legible and useful while also displaying some human subjectivity or experience. The idea of stretching or contracting sections of time to account for the experience of it is very fascinating and could be quite useful. But even here the focus is more on using graphs to communicate ideas than actually presenting data. Take for example this graph, representing the use of certain keywords in the paper:

<!--	Exported from Voyant Tools (voyant-tools.org). The iframe src attribute below uses a relative protocol to better function with both http and https sites, but if you're embedding this into a local web page (file protocol) you should add an explicit protocol (https if you're using voyant-tools.org, otherwise it depends on this server. Feel free to change the height and width values or other styling below: -->
<iframe style='width: 100%; height: 600px' src='//voyant-tools.org/?view=Trends&query=graphical&query=time&query=information&query=data&query=humanistic&query=interpretation&query=display&query=space&withDistributions=raw&docIndex=0&mode=document&corpus=5c3a8136982df824fa6c118a2e6254a1'></iframe>

We can see “information” spike twice near the beginning of the paper, as she is first criticizing graphs and then explaining her capta theory, but later demonstrations of her ideas don’t refer to the information itself. The line for “data” begins high, again because of her early criticisms, but is barely mentioned through the rest of the paper. Her focus on both “time” and “space” later on relate to her focus and intent to promote these ideas rather than actually tearing down the system as it is. However, looking at this word cloud does show that while “graphical” elements and “time” are the largest focus both “information” and “data” are the next most addressed topics.

<!--	Exported from Voyant Tools (voyant-tools.org). The iframe src attribute below uses a relative protocol to better function with both http and https sites, but if you're embedding this into a local web page (file protocol) you should add an explicit protocol (https if you're using voyant-tools.org, otherwise it depends on this server. Feel free to change the height and width values or other styling below: -->
<iframe style='width: 100%; height: 600px' src='//voyant-tools.org/?view=Cirrus&visible=25&corpus=5c3a8136982df824fa6c118a2e6254a1'></iframe>

As an aside the world cloud is similar to some of her later ideas about the size of fonts being used to show importance. Additionally, while the word cloud doesn’t place much importance on them, the direction, position and colour of the words could indicate other variables; a gradient could even be applied instead of solid colours. This is a better example of making a complex graph simply because, with the proper key, it’s easily comprehensible.

Her ideas are interesting, certainly, but overall Drucker was limited a bit by her own reliance on the two dimensions of a page. While some of her examples are incomprehensible messes when flattened out they could be better displayed if a third dimension, or depth, was added for more variables. Such 3D graphs are already being researched and produced, and the common computer is capable of displaying them, so why hasn’t research led to widespread use of 3D space for graphs? It may simply come down to the fact that 3D visualizations are, “part of a continuum of visual sources and methodologies the majority of which are also relatively young and so lack the long histories of debate that have shaped other forms of scholarship,” (Jessop).

From that perspective we can also consider that graphs themselves are fairly recent, when compared to books or other forms of recorded information and knowledge, and that perhaps their evolution hinges on further innovations. So while Drucker’s assumptions and critiques can ring fairly false she is at least pushing for the advancement of graphs as a medium and tool.


## Works Cited

Drucker, J. (2011). Humanities Approaches to Graphical Display. Digital Humanities Quarterly, 5(1).

Jessop, M. (2008). Digital visualization as a scholarly activity. Literary & Linguistic Computing, 23(3), 281.

Moretti, F. (2003). Graphs, maps, trees. New Left Review, (24), 67. 
